@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex xwpe
@cindex Borland
@cindex Turbo C

xwpe is a programming environment and text editor for UNIX systems.
It provides a Borland Turbo C-style interface with syntax highlighting,
an integrated compiler and debugger, project management, and mouse
support --- all in a terminal or X11 window.

@section The four binaries

@cindex we
@cindex wpe
@cindex xwe
@cindex xwpe binary

xwpe installs four binaries, all built from the same source code.
The binary name determines the mode:

@table @command
@item we
Text editor for terminals.  No compiler or debugger integration.

@item wpe
Programming environment for terminals.  Includes compiler, debugger,
project management, and the full menu system.

@item xwe
Text editor for X11.  Same as @command{we} but with an X11 window
instead of a terminal.

@item xwpe
Programming environment for X11.  Same as @command{wpe} but with
an X11 window.
@end table

The terminal binaries (@command{we}, @command{wpe}) use ncursesw for
display and work in any terminal emulator, tmux, screen, or the Linux
console.  The X11 binaries (@command{xwe}, @command{xwpe}) create their
own window with a fixed-width font.

If you are unsure which to use, start with @command{wpe}.

@section What xwpe can do

@itemize @bullet
@item
Edit multiple files simultaneously in tiled or overlapping windows.

@item
Syntax highlighting for C, C++, Fortran, Pascal, Java, Perl, Python,
shell scripts, and other languages (configurable via @file{syntax_def}).

@item
Compile from within the editor (@key{F9}).  Errors are parsed and the
cursor jumps to the corresponding source line.

@item
Debug with gdb (or sdb/dbx) without leaving the editor.  Set breakpoints,
inspect variables, step through code, and view the call stack.

@item
IDE features from a real @dfn{language server} (LSP): completion, hover with
types, go-to-definition, references, rename and more, under the @kbd{Alt-Q}
prefix.  Five languages are wired -- Scala (Metals), C/C++ (clangd), Python
(pyright/pylsp), Go (gopls) and Rust (rust-analyzer); the server is an external
tool, so the editor stays small (@pxref{Language servers}).

@item
Manage multi-file projects with a project file that stores compiler
flags, source file lists, and build targets.

@item
Browse man pages and GNU info nodes from the @samp{Help} menu.

@item
Mouse support in both terminal (via GPM) and X11 modes.
@end itemize

@section Who is xwpe for?

xwpe occupies a niche between simple editors (@command{nano},
@command{mcedit}) and complex ones (@command{vim}, @command{emacs}).
If you want:

@itemize @minus
@item
A menu-driven IDE that works over SSH,
@item
Borland-style keybindings from muscle memory,
@item
An integrated compile-edit-debug cycle out of the box -- and optional
zero-config IDE features (LSP) when a language server is on your @env{PATH},
@item
Something that starts instantly and runs on any terminal,
@end itemize

@noindent
then xwpe may be what you need.

@section Project history (brief)

@cindex Fred Kruse
@cindex Dennis Payne
@cindex Juan Manuel Mendez Rey

Fred Kruse wrote xwpe in 1993 at the Technical University of Berlin.
He released it as free software under the GNU GPL and maintained it
through version 1.4.2 (circa 1997), then went silent.

Dennis Payne picked up the project in 2000, renaming it ``xwpe-alpha''
to distinguish it from Kruse's official releases.  He added X11 support,
GPM mouse, autoconf, and many bug fixes through version 1.5.30a (2006),
then the project went dormant.

In 2026, Juan Manuel M@'endez Rey took over upstream maintenance with
Dennis Payne's blessing.  Version 1.6.0 replaced the 1993 byte-based
screen buffer with a structured @code{SCREENCELL} type for native UTF-8
display, added terminal resize support, and fixed keyboard mapping for
modern terminals.  Version 1.6.1 modernised the build system with
automake.

For the full history, see @ref{History}.

@section Documentation

xwpe provides three levels of documentation:

@table @asis
@item In-app help (@key{F1})
A built-in help file covering menus, key bindings, and basic usage.
Press @key{F1} from within xwpe to open it.

@item This manual (@command{info xwpe})
The comprehensive Texinfo manual you are reading now.  It covers
installation, configuration, compiler integration, debugging, tutorials,
and the full command reference.

@item Man pages (@command{man xwpe})
Standard UNIX man pages for @command{we}, @command{wpe}, @command{xwe},
and @command{xwpe}.
@end table
