\input texinfo
@setfilename xwpe.info
@include version.texi
@settitle xwpe @value{VERSION}

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 1993--1997 Fred Kruse.
Copyright @copyright{} 2000--2006 Dennis Payne.
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Juan Manuel M@'endez Rey.

@quotation
This manual is for xwpe (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
a Borland-style programming environment for UNIX.

Released under the GNU General Public License, version 2.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Editors
@direntry
* xwpe: (xwpe).  Borland-style programming environment for UNIX.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title xwpe
@subtitle Borland-style Programming Environment for UNIX
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author Fred Kruse
@author Dennis Payne
@author Juan Manuel M@'endez Rey
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top xwpe

This is the manual for xwpe (version @value{VERSION}), a programming
environment and text editor for UNIX terminals and X11.

xwpe was written by Fred Kruse in 1993, maintained by Dennis Payne from
2000 to 2006, and revived in 2026 by Juan Manuel M@'endez Rey.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::          What xwpe is and who it's for.
* Installation::          Building and installing xwpe.
* Interface tour::        The menu system, windows, and mouse.
* Editor::                Keys, search/replace, blocks, file manager.
* Configuration::         xwperc, syntax_def, X resources.
* Compiling::             The F9 cycle and compiler integration.
* Debugging::             gdb/sdb/dbx backends, breakpoints, watches.
* Projects::              Project files and multi-file builds.
* Tutorials::             Step-by-step walkthroughs.
* Bugs and limits::       Known issues and workarounds.
* History::               From Fred Kruse (1993) to today.
* Reference::             Command-line options, menu tree, key cheatsheet.
* Index::
@end menu

@include chapters/intro.texi
@include chapters/installation.texi
@include chapters/interface.texi
@include chapters/editor.texi
@include chapters/configuration.texi
@include chapters/compiling.texi
@include chapters/debugging.texi
@include chapters/projects.texi
@include chapters/tutorials.texi
@include chapters/bugs-and-limits.texi
@include chapters/history.texi
@include chapters/reference.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
